[[!tag syria society sex]]
Tonight I had the pleasure to debate with two Syrian friends I like very much, during and after a diner. The main topic was about sexual practices and about having principles.

Homosexual practices. Should they be considered "natural" for a human being or not? Group sexual practices. Should one teach as a principle to their child that it's somehow wrong?

Then I went back home, turned on the computer screen and glanced at my IRC window to catch news from the friends inside Syria, as usual. And all suddenly appeared crystal-clear:

## Who fucking cares?
I just learnt that 320 people were killed in one evening, including 250 only in Hama. Mortar shells and missiles fell [around one of my friend Ameer in Barzeh](https://syria.wnh.me/ebf36ed47a3edf2755cab471ab02b2ef). 320 people. In one evening. Using helicopters, tanks, whatever. Does this even still make sense?

As everyday in Syria, this is the ultimate result of intolerence and fear.

How do we dare speaking about applying principles on people's sexual life when 320 people are killed in the meantime, just because they ask for the most basic freedom. Or just because they do nothing. By which mental process can we seriously think we are going to protect the society with such debates, when there are massacres in a country where these debates have maybe never surfaced? How can we pretend we have to differentiate ourselves animals by not having "abnormal" (?) sexual behaviour when the most basic animal instincts have been killing tens of thousands of people during more than 16 months?

This is ridiculous.

Whether you fuck with one, a hundred or no partner, you can be a sheep or a wolf. Same probability.

Make love and share. Let's keep our principles for when it comes to saving human dignity and freedom in the face of oppression. While I'm concluding, Ameer can here a sniper shooting continuously nearby his house. So please master your fears, and feel pleased for your fellow human beings who grab moments of pleasure as they wish to. It's precious.
