[[!tag syria turkey qamishly nusaybin kilis assalameh azaz aleppo kurdistan]]

[[!img defaults size=300x]]

_Javascript notice: this post uses Javascript to display OpenStreetMap maps. The rest (text and photos) is viewable without if you do not wish to enable it._

I wandered around the Turkey-Syria border during the first week of February, 2013. I went to the Kurdish border town of [Nusaybin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nusaybin), facing very closely its Syrian counterpart, [Qamishly](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qamishli). I went shortly after to [Kilis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kilis), a Turkish town near Syria's border crossing [Bab Assalameh](http://www.openstreetmap.org/?mlat=36.632911&mlon=37.0844364&zoom=15&layers=M) (also written Bab al-Salameh) in [Aleppo region](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aleppo_Governorate). I briefly crossed the border in Bab Assalameh and spent a few hours on the Syrian side.

[[!more linktext="Read full article..."]]

Those places are two worlds where the Syrian revolution has completely different faces. I am trying here to compare what I saw and heard in those places, as it might help a bit in understanding what is going on.

All the photographs in this article were taken by myself. I uploaded more complete sets of pictures [here](https://words.ceops.eu/arabtrip/20130201-Nusaybin/) (Nusaybin) and [here](https://words.ceops.eu/arabtrip/20130207-BabAssalameh/) (Bab Assalameh). The icons on the map below allows the reader to locate those places; you can click on them for a short summary.

[[!osm map="border_overview" lat="37.08" lon="39.2" zoom=7 editable=1 width=100%]]

_This article comes from what I witnessed, from discussions with people I met and is sometimes completed with a few readings that I link to. I do not pretend to be objective or comprehensive, and the reader should find additional sources to get a full idea of the situation._

[[!toc levels=2]]

# Kilis-Bab Assalameh: fights, destructions and massive displacements

## Massive Syrian presence in Turkey's Kilis and Gaziantep

Kilis and [Gaziantep](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaziantep) (the big city north from Kilis) have an obvious presence of Syrians displaced by the conflict. Some have settled months or weeks ago, others just spend a short time before going back to Syria with food or goods. Hundreds of Syrian cars circulate on the main road between the border and Gaziantep. There is a very noticeable Syrian daily life in Kilis, which seemed to me seeminglessly integrated with the locals, most of them speaking Arabic. Syrians in Kilis seem mostly opposed to the regime, some cafés displaying the flag of the revolution.

[[!img images/P1130663_up.jpg alt="The Syrian car in which I was driven from Kilis to the border, full of unknown material" caption="The Syrian car in which I was driven from Kilis to the border, full of unknown material"]]

Housing prices have reportedly increased significantly in Kilis, as Turkish landlords raise prices because incoming Syrians increase the demand.

## Busy border crossing between Kilis and FSA-controlled Bab Assalameh

The border crossing of Kilis-Bab Assalameh is actually a few kilometers south from Kilis and is thus not in an urban area. The same goes on the Syrian side, as the closest town is [Azaz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Azaz), also a few kilometers away from the border.

The border crossing is open and busy all day long with a non-stop flow of Syrians going in and out, trucks delivering goods to Syria, wounded people transferred to Turkey, journalists, organization volunteers and so on. Normal rules seem to apply on Turkish side, implying that Syrians with a valid passport can come freely in an out of Turkey. Others can try to sneak in but can be arrested and sent back by the Turkish army. On the Syrian side, it seems there is no strict enforcement of any immigration rule. Crossing with a car into Turkey requires documents and/or payment of a tax to Turkish authorities, so many Syrians park before crossing and walk.

I met a Syrian guy from Aleppo crossing the border by foot, carrying heavy bags full of clothes for his family and friends. His about-to-fall-into-pieces car was parked on the Syrian side and he was about to drive the way down to Aleppo. Dozens of civilians who cannot cross the border with a car were doing the same to ensure survival of some people inside. A number of Syrians also cary goods into Syria for trading purposes rather than just to help people.

Bab Assalameh is run by the Free Syrian Army (FSA). A small number of gunmen try to keep it somewhat organized, mostly by overseeing traffic and checking vehicles' content. There is a press office to which foreign journalists (professional or not) must make themselves known upon arrival. I had to as well, they asked me a few questions before letting me wander around and take pictures.

[[!img images/P1130673.jpg alt="Welcome to Syria..." caption="Welcome to Syria..."]] [[!img images/P1130685_up.jpg alt="Trying to make it look organized" caption="Trying to make it look organized"]]

I saw dozens, if not hundreds, of trucks going to Syria. I was told that tons of food and goods are delivered by Turkish authorities to northern Syria, but I do not know exactly how they are dispatched. I saw for example trucks full of flour and new mattresses. A truck carrying drinking water tanks for the refugees was parked in the camp. Some trucks were covered and I could not see their content.

I've been told that international law forbids non-neighboring foreign countries to deliver goods into Syria. Consequently, the help that officially reaches northern Syria exclusively relies on Turkish government via their relief organization [IHH](http://www.ihh.org.tr/) and on importations made by Syrians themselves.

[[!img images/P1130690.JPG alt="Loaded trucks queueing to enter Syria" caption="Loaded trucks queueing to enter Syria"]]

I witnessed the transfer of an injured person at the border crossing: brougth by a Syrian van used as an ambulance, the person was transferred to a Turkish ambulance to be treated in Kilis. Wounded Syrians are allowed into Turkey depending on how seriously they are wounded (there seems to be very precise criterions). I heard that someone shot himself in the hand to be granted entry into Turkey for himself and his family. I also saw a Swedish (yes) ambulance vehicle operating on the Syrian side.

[[!img images/P1130667.JPG alt="A Turkish ambulance going from Syria to Turkey with a wounded person" caption="A Turkish ambulance going from Syria to Turkey with a wounded person"]]

## Thousands of refugees living in poor conditions

Even though the Syrian conflict is obvious from the Turkish side, entering Syria slapped my face: just after the 100 meters of the in-between road, you enter in a world of mess, mud, broken infrastructure and poor living conditions.

There are refugee camps on both sides of the border. While the Turkish camp seems to be made of solid houses (I did not enter there), the Syrian one only consists of tents. It is located alongside the road where all trucks pass by all day long. It apparently welcomes about 10,000 refugees coming mostly from the regions of Aleppo and Idlib. The reason for their displacement is the constant risk of bombardment by warplanes or SCUDs, SCUDs being apparently [fired from Damascus bases](http://syria-videos.ceops.eu/damascus/yabroud/2013-02-22-Probably%20a%20SCUD%20missile,%20apparently%20fired%20from%20Qalamoun%20and%20going%20towards%20the%20North%20of%20Syria,%20where%20several%20SCUDs%20already%20fell..webm).

Due to international law, there is no real international help reaching the Syrian camp. The Turkish-owned IHH organization is however legally present in the camp.

The site is muddy and some children do not have proper shoes. Cold nights are probably hard in the tents, which were apparently brougth in by a private Syrian initiative. Food and water do not seem to be an issue. In short, conditions seem sufficient to physically survive.

[[!img images/P1130677.JPG alt="The camp: tents and mud" caption="The camp: tents and mud"]] [[!img images/P1130680_up.JPG alt="Children fetching drinking water from a tank" caption="Children fetching drinking water from a tank"]]

Refugees either wait for a place in the Turkish camp or go back and forth to their hometown inside Syria. The bombardments push them to flee to the camp, but its poor living conditions push them back to their home if they still have one. Those seeking refuge in Turkey most probably do not have a valid passport or enough money to get a house, making them stuck until Turkey lets a batch of refugees in. Turkish camps are said to be full, and refugees can get in when Turkey decides so.

Some people had their home blasted by bombardments and thus have nothing left. People's lifes in the camp are to a nearly complete halt. No work indeed, poor communication with outside, no infrastructure, i.e. not much that can fill their souls with hope. The world they have access to consists in a muddy camp with an unpassable border on one side and bombs falling on the other side. A good point however, some bigger tents are used as classrooms for children, but I don't think there are enough "classrooms" for all of them.

[[!img images/P1130686_up.JPG alt="A girls classroom during a lesson" caption="A girls classroom during a lesson" size=x300]]

Witnessing this was depressing and reminded me that while people abroad watch spectacular videos of fights on Al-Arabiya, there are civilians who need help to somehow get something to live for.

## Chaotic FSA control from the border down to Aleppo

The area from Bab Assalameh down to Aleppo's outskirts is nearly completely out of regime control and will very likely stay so. This does however not mean that the FSA holds a firm grip all over the region, as it is quite a complex patchwork (as Syria is in general):

- some towns ([Azaz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Azaz) and [Marea](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mare%27) for example) are clearly opposed to the regime and are under FSA control;
- it is possible to circulate by car fairly securely in most of the region without meeting any regime checkpoint;
- a few spots are still under regime's army control, such as the military airbase of [Meng](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minakh_Air_Base) (also written Minakh) south from Azaz;
- some other towns' populations are supportive to the regime, such as [Nubl](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nubl);
- there are Kurdish towns like [Afrin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Afrin,_Syria) and nearby villages which seem to be considered "unsure" as they are not strictly aligned with a side or another.

[[!img images/aleppo_region.png size=200x alt="Rough map of the area from Kilis down to Aleppo, showing zones of presence of the regime army in red" caption="Rough map of the area from Kilis down to Aleppo, showing zones of presence of the regime army in red"]]

In short, one can circulate quite safely in the area but the situation may vary a lot within a couple of kilometers. Some neighboring towns show opposed support and one can hear stories of kidnappings, massacres and reprisals in such areas. Lots of cars reach Aleppo from Bab Assalameh daily. This also includes foreign journalists who sometimes go on "organized tours" on Aleppo or Meng frontlines with the FSA's press office.

Towns supportive to the FSA are usual targets for warplanes and SCUDs (see for examples [video of destructions](http://syria-videos.ceops.eu/aleppo/tel-rifaat/) of [Tall Rifat](http://www.openstreetmap.org/?mlat=36.470267&mlon=37.0954454&layers=M) which was apparently targeted by SCUDs in the night of 18-19th February). Planes (old MiGs) seem to attack during daytime and clear weather only (possibly due to visibility issues), whereas SCUDs can fall anytime. The regime hasn't, until now, sent warplanes over the refugee camp.

The situation of Aleppo city and its outskirts is difficult to catch with precision. Even though zones of control inside the city fluctuate from a day to another, the situation seems globally steady and no-one has any strong advantage.

The incomplete map of the area displayed above shows regime's military presence in red, either due to permanent military bases or troops occupation. It is also available in [SVG format](https://words.ceops.eu/arabtrip/data/aleppo_region.svg) (4.2 MB) and [compressed SVG](https://words.ceops.eu/arabtrip/data/aleppo_region.svg.bz2) (492 KB). The map data and military bases come from OpenStreetMap, the contour (elevation) lines from [SRTM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shuttle_Radar_Topography_Mission) and the army-occupied zones from information I gathered personally.

Finally, the map below allows to locate those spots and see the faction by which they are controlled. Click on flags to get locality name and brief description.

[[!osm map="north_west_syria" lat="36.4" lon="37.2" width=100% editable=1 height=500px zoom=10]]

# Nusaybin-Qamishly: definitely not the same revolution

## Kurdistan's particular background

Nusaybin and Qamishly are in [Kurdistan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kurdistan), and this is a key point to understand their [situation regarding the Syrian revolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2012_Syrian_Kurdistan_rebellion).

Kurds have a history of being subject to various forms of oppression from the countries' governments over which Kurdistan extends: Turkey, Syria and Iraq. This has probably increased solidarity between Kurds over the borders. They also have strong common cultural references, such as the Kurdish language. More generally, those national borders are a non-sense in regard to the Kurdish people and their history on this land: families and friends are often spread over Kurdistan regardless of the borders.

Nusaybin and Qamishly are so close one to the other that they are virtually the same city split in two. To some extent, this reminded me of stories and scenes of the [Berlin wall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berlin_wall).

[[!img images/P1130627.JPG alt="Taken from a street in Nusaybin town center: this farming field behind the fence is in Qamishly" caption="Taken from a street in Nusaybin town center: this farming field behind the fence is in Qamishly"]]

From a Kurdish perspective, there are mixed necessities to resist at the same time from the oppression from Turkish and Syrian governments and from the threat that the FSA and other groups may represent. Hence, Kurdish groups seem generally not strictly aligned with one or the other side in the uprising, even though some groups can be considered as mostly allied with the regime and others mostly allied with the FSA. The Kurdish position in the conflict must be seen as a third set of non-aligned movements with its peculiar considerations.

While I did not witness troubles (just a couple of happy rifle shootings for a wedding), the Turkish security policy is a bit shocking. In Nusaybin, I did not see a single _standard_ police car: every single patroling car was an armored vehicle with mounted rifle gun, sometimes accompanied by an anti-riot water cannon equipped truck. Indeed, this increases tension and fear.

[[!img images/P1130652.JPG alt="A classical police patrol car in Nusaybin: armored and rifle-equipped" caption="A classical police patrol car in Nusaybin: armored and rifle-equipped"]]

## A peaceful situation at first glance

Nusaybin has a peaceful and normal daily life: shops and cafés are open, streets are crowded, public transports work normally, etc.

The border crossing has been closed due to the conflict at least [since August 2012](https://westernkurdistan.wordpress.com/2013/02/16/the-kurdish-situation-in-syria-and-kurdistan/), other sources mentioning [early 2012](http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2110961,00.html) and even [late 2011](http://www.yalibnan.com/2011/10/09/syria-closes-a-border-crossing-with-turkey/). Possibly, there were moments when it was re-open, but it has probably been closed most of the time.

[[!img images/P1130645.JPG alt="Alongside the border: quietness" caption="Alongside the border: quietness"]]

The ground has a flat topology and, unlike Kilis which is a few kilometers away from the border, both Nusaybin's and Qamishly's urban areas extend up to as close as possible to the border fence. Hence, in Nusaybin town center people can walk along the fence and have an open view on Qamishly, only a couple of hundreds meters away.

The border zone, though featuring a military base and dozens of watch towers, is not very strictly guarded. It is usual to see shepherds leading their cattle in the quiet no man's land and young people or children playing just behind the first fence, parts of it being broken. A military truck with a few of soldiers would intervene if some people have a behavior they do not like, and playing children would run off and come back five minutes later.

[[!img images/P1130649.JPG alt="Children playing in the first meters of the no man's land, Qamishly is in the background" caption="Children playing in the first meters of the no man's land, Qamishly is in the background"]]

The regime flag is floating on the Syrian side. There is no SCUD falling or warplanes bombing Qamishly. The destruction is in no way comparable to Aleppo region. I did not notice any building of Qamishly that looked destroyed because of shelling.

[[!img images/P1130635.JPG alt="The crossing point, taken from behind the border fence, displaying the regime flag" caption="The crossing point, taken from behind the border fence, displaying the regime flag"]]

Logically, there is no Syrian activity in Nusaybin like in Kilis and only a few cars can be seen from time to time. I saw one or two luxury cars being washed on the parking of a motel dedicated to road trippers (mostly trucks driver), on the side of a motorway passing near the town. 

People I met were not really keen on talking about Qamishly, even though most had friends or relatives there. The opinion about the Syrian uprising seems to be that it may not bring anything better, even though Assad does not seem to be particularly appreciated. The predominant feeling seems to be the fear of a degradation of the Kurds' condition as a result of the change in the ruling of Syria.

## Discrete traces of a peculiar conflict

In a shop, some young men buying beers asked me, laughing, "_what the hell are you doing here in this war?_", even before I mentioned Syria. Some others, smoking hashish near the border, asked me, laughing as well, if I was planning to go to Qamishly. Some older men told me they thougth that living conditions in Qamishly were very bad (no electricity, war, etc.) whereas some others told me that the conditions were OK and that the town was mostly peaceful. But I could not have any real in-depth conversation.

It is not easy to know if people are reluctant to have serious conversation because they lack information or because they want to avoid the topic, being fed up with years of instability. It is also not easy to know if contradictory statements also come from a lack of information or from a will to influence my opinion.

During the day, a few people wander around the border, on the phone with their friends or family and waving at them accross the no man's land. A couple I talked to near the border refused to be photographed, "_We are afraid, our family is in Qamishly_", they said. They had gone all the way from Qamishly to Bab Assalameh (an approximately 450km journey), had crossed into Kilis and then had gone all the way back on the Turkish side, from Kilis to Nusaybin. Some cafés near the border appear to be usual meeting points for Syrians.

While daytime is very lively in town, all streets become empty very quickly at sunset, and the darkness that everyone seems to flee appeared to me as an invitation for more underground, less noticeable activities.

There are probably events or movements that would need a closer look to be noticed. I know from trusted sources that PKK militants - just like many Kurds - are present in Nusaybin and circulate to and from Qamishly. Other Kurd militants act against PKK's actions, and all of this is related to the mixture of conflicts in the middle of which Kurds live, including the Syrian revolution.

[[!img images/P1130641.JPG alt="The no man's land and Qamishly - some flags floating on high points are possibly Kurdish, not Syrian flags" caption="The no man's land and Qamishly - some flags floating on high points are possibly Kurdish, not Syrian flags"]]

Sneaking through the border to/from Qamishly is apparently "_very easy_". It is, at least, possible for sure, as confirmed by [the story of this Italian photograph from last November](http://www.zona.org/en/appunti-siriani-nusaybin/). The absence of heavy patroling from Turks as well as the quite friendly ground also makes it more than likely, even though some reports indicate the presence of landmines in the no man's land. I guess people cross the border mostly during nighttime.

While Qamishly seemed quiet, there are more open fights going on in areas nearby between various Kurd factions, the FSA and Assad's army.
The [battle of Ras al-Ayn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Ras_al-Ayn), located West from Qamishly, is a good example of this mixed conflicts between the three belligerants.

# Other regions of the border

There are indeed other bordering areas which have their particularities depending on many factors such as the level of violence on the Syrian side, the composition of the population on both sides, the presence of the various armed factions, etc.:

- in [Cizre](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cizre), located further East from Nusaybin, [at the border with both Iraq and Syria](http://www.openstreetmap.org/?lat=37.256&lon=42.287&zoom=11&layers=M), there seems to be even less traces of the Syrian uprising but more tensions between Turkish authorities and some of the Kurdish population; there is no major city or town on the Syrian side of the border;
- in [Şanlıurfa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C5%9Eanl%C4%B1urfa), located roughly [halfway between Nusaybin and Gaziantep](http://www.openstreetmap.org/?lat=36.95&lon=39&zoom=8&layers=M), the population is mixed between Turks, Arabs and Kurds, and one can see displaced Syrian families in the streets and public transports; Şanlıurfa is the big city near [Akçakale](http://www.openstreetmap.org/?lat=36.874&lon=38.982&zoom=10&layers=M) where there are a refugee camp and the border crossing and where [incidents took place](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/October_2012_Syrian%E2%80%93Turkish_border_clash) with the Syrian army;
- [Antakya and its region](http://www.openstreetmap.org/?lat=36.451&lon=36.468&zoom=9&layers=M) is known to have a high activity in relation to the Syrian uprising: it hosts several refugee camps near the border with people coming from Idlib and Aleppo, but also has a local population that is in majority supportive to Assad's regime, and some of them are said to be cooperating with Assad's intelligence services (_mukhabarat_).

# Conclusion

I hope that the reader will perceive how the Syrian revolution has many different faces, and how these faces can be noticed easily even by staying in bordering areas.

Whereas in the Western part with an Arab majority, near Aleppo and Idlib, the displacements and destruction are huge and the violence includes use of warplane bombings and SCUDs, the Eastern part, mostly Kurdish, has a very different ongoing conflict where fights seem to be essentially done on the ground, with smaller weapons and destructions, and involving peculiar factions associated to the Kurds.

I would encourage people who have been following the conflict from far away to go there by themselves if they are itching to do so. There is not much danger to fear in the areas I was, and seeing the situation and talking to people helps a lot in understanding. The areas are very easy to reach accross Turkey. You can [contact me](https://id.ceops.eu/kheops/) in case you need more information, I can try to help.

Now, what can we do to help? This is a vast issue where answers range from giving money to training citizen journalists as well as giving clothes to civilians, tents, books for children, ... As there is hardly any doubt that foreign governments are not really helpful, action on a decentralized and individual basis may be relevant.
