[[!tag united_kingdom poverty iain_duncan_smith]]

_This is a guest article written by a French citizen living in London. It is a reply to UK's Secretary of State for Work and Pension [Iain Duncan-Smith](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ian_duncan-smith) who claimed he could live for £53 per week._

[[!more linktext="Read letter..." text="""

Suddenly I find myself wrong-footed. Years ago I left France where I used to live and work, feeling increasingly an outcast or an outsider as I would resort to rude words such as "flexible" and "mobile" and could hardly grasp how a guy who'd lost his job near his home in [Sologne](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sologne) could turn down an offer in [Amboise](http://www.openstreetmap.org/?mlat=47.407&mlon=0.996&zoom=9&layers=M). Having inherited a dual culture from French and English parents, I do believe in the ethics that work should pay and value the notion of resilience by which many British people abide.

Since you can do it, living on 53 pounds a week, I've taken up the challenge this week:

- Easter Monday: I eye with anxiety the stock of little Gems, blue cheese, yogurt and soups in the fridge, all bought before your weekend declaration: 17.70 pounds. Turn thermostat down and tell Jessie the cat re-homed from Battersea that she'll have to go back to real mice. Forget Whiskas jelly they advised.
- Tuesday: cycle to work in South Ken', all fine as the week ahead is cold but dry. Latte is £1.95 and I always leave the 5p change. Cheapest lentil soup and toast plus tea for a quick lunch in the area is £4.70. Total is £6.70.
- Wednesday: repeat. Back home at 6pm, Jessie has taken my advice literally, chasing a mouse in the kitchen. I close the door to ignore the mayhem
- Thursday: 30mn lunch-break only so it's fruit and a yogurt bought early, add up 2 teas and you reach £5.50. Not hungry for dinner after disposing of the corpse of the mouse Jessie has kindly displayed near the bin.
- Friday: day off so the salad and a few nuts will do plus loads of Yorkshire tea with milk. Must add up the sums and send, though how do I take into account heating, electricity, the fraction of my 277-pound annual bill for water, wifi and clothing? Should I also add the monthly council tax? I assume rent or mortgage would be set apart.

Such a declaration made in France would have caused angry, if not violent, reactions among the public and press, with or without the current backdrop of the hidden bank account scandal. Like Lady Bracknell, I tend to disapprove of displays of "contempt for the ordinary decencies of family life that remind one of the worst excesses of the French Revolution"; however, isn't this statement too reductive, displaying how disconnected you might be from harsh reality here in the UK, and also too despising when numerous people go on working far beyond retirement age in other countries and sometimes bravely juggle two jobs to survive?

This is the country that produced the Beveridge report and the daring creation of the NHS, the land I've chosen to settle down, where we say "thank you driver" when getting off the bus, where you feel a sense of community and solidarity. It's precious.

"""]]
