[[!tag syria violence activism]]
Last days, I have spent a lot of time with a dozen of Syrian people - a three-generation family and some friends of theirs - in Cairo. They fled Syria a year ago. Their material situation is not too bad: a house for the whole family and enough resources to eat very well. This is quite an ordinary story.

All of them are "part of the revolution". Or, at least, opposed to Assad's regime and expecting him to fall.

While they are away, they are waiting for the revolution to finish in order to be able to go back home and continue the life that has been paused by the situation.

## Waiting
Waiting.

That just jumped to my face.

The time here is very enjoyable, they are all incredibly kind and the solidarity between them is intense. Conversations, laughs, very good food, poker and chess games, smoking hashish, drinking Akra. In the background, running nearly 24/24, the TV alternating between news shows, music channels and cartoons for the children.

This relaxed atmosphere initially looks nothing else than just extremely welcoming. Then you realize it is repeating everyday. TV shows kill the thinking, children cannot go to school, people are unemployed and consequently constrained to spend as little money as possible. These relaxed, enjoyable moments suddenly appear as a sad routine. Same evenings, sitting on the same sofas, watching the same TV shows and playing the same card games. Until the exhaustion allows people to fall quickly asleep, avoiding the danger of those pre-sleep thoughts that could reveal this creeping depression. Perpetual dizziness.

Focused on the image of something that might happen sooner or later, everything is made to wait for it without thinking about it.

Just waiting.

## The Success of Repression
Here we are: the hope for an end is put aside as much as possible even though it the exact thing that is making the waiting worth it.

People have become unable to concieve that they are capable of doing something to move the situation. Not until "something happens", something that is way beyond their control.

Assad's regime has succeeded: violence has crushed people's self-confidence and belief that they can actively be part of something even from abroad. Human creativity has been torn apart into an anxious subjugation to TV news shows, amateur video extracts and politicians' declarations. This is one purpose of the regime's ever-increasing violence, apart from "only" the massive killing.

Of course, some Syrians continue to meet up and imagine how they can be useful to society, in Syria or somewhere else in the meantime. Some haven't given up on dreaming and acting accordingly. I wish the knocked out creativity of all the people here could wake up. I guess this firstly needs to acknowledge that Assad's fall may still be out of sight but that it is something that must be dealt with.

By the way, how many of us face much easier situations and just wait for someone/something else to solve their problems?
