[[!tag syria violence activism]]
Last days, I have spent a lot of time with a dozen of Syrian people - a three-generation family and some friends of theirs - in Cairo. They fled Syria a year ago. Their material situation is not too bad (house and food for everyone), mostly thanks to their familiy living in other countries and sending money to them. Quite an ordinary story.

All of them are "part of the revolution". Or, at least, opposed to Assad's regime and expecting him to fall.

They are waiting for the revolution to finish in order to be able to go back home and continue the life that has been paused by the situation.

## Waiting
Waiting.

That just jumped to my face.

The time here is very enjoyable, they are all incredibly kind and the solidarity between them is intense. Conversations, laughs, very good food, poker and chess games, smoking hashish, drinking Arak. In the background, nearly 24/24, the TV alternating between news shows, music channels and cartoons for the children.

This relaxed atmosphere initially looks nothing else but just extremely welcoming. Then you realize it is repeating everyday. TV shows kill the thinking, children cannot go to school, people are unemployed and consequently constrained to spend as little money as possible. These relaxed, enjoyable moments suddenly appear as a sad routine. Same evenings, sitting on the same sofas, watching the same TV shows and playing the same card games. Until exhaustion allows people to fall quickly asleep, avoiding the danger of those pre-sleep thoughts that could reveal this creeping depression. A perpetual dizziness to avoid thinking.

Focused on the image of something - Assad's fall - that might happen sooner or later, everything is made to wait for it without thinking about it. As if Assad's fall would get everything back to normal like before.

Just waiting.

## The Success of Repression
Here we are: the hope for an end is put aside as much as possible even though it is the exact thing that is making the waiting worth it.

People have become unable to concieve that they are capable of doing something to move the situation. Not until "something happens", something that is way beyond their control.

Assad's regime has succeeded: violence has crushed people's self-confidence and belief that they can actively be part of something, even from a safe place abroad. Human creativity has been torn apart into anxious subjugation to TV news shows, video footages and politicians' declarations. Most forcefully expatriated Syrians who used to be active now seem massively unable to imagine themselves doing anything useful for the revolution. Discouraging imagination is one purpose of the ever-increasing violence, apart from "only" the massive killing. The precarious economical situation of expatriated Syrians, the loss of their homes and the uneasy adaptation to their new social environment complicate things even more.

## Deal with it and Do Something
Doing protests from abroad seem meaningless to most. No real action can be taken by random people to make the regime fall.

Waiting for the falling as a main objective is in fact probably the biggest mistake. Firstly because there is nothing that can be done about it without a weapon, secondly because no one knows how many months or years will still be needed, and finally because the success of the revolution from a civilian perspective now barely depends on Assad's fate but rather on how things will turn out afterwards.

It must be acknowledged that Assad's fall may still be out of sight, and the focus must be put on something else. Much more subtle and complicated issues are awaiting all Syrians, and it is far from too early to start thinking about it instead of using Assad as an excuse for doing nothing.

Some Syrians I have met continue to be active and imagine how they can be useful to society, in Syria or somewhere else in the meantime. Some [draw](https://www.facebook.com/JuanZeroSyrianCartoonist) (Sorry Facebook link), some [sing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PcoQWeOFnSU), some intend to help refugees or start political parties. They haven't given up on dreaming and acting accordingly.

I wish the knocked out creativity of most Syrians here could wake up. The revolution has started because of people's hope for something better, Assad's presence should thus not be a reason for not building what will come next.

_This article was written with the help of three Syrian friends - thank you._
